docs/nextflow/getting-started.rst, before:


Getting started
===============

.. contents:: Table of Contents

Introduction
------------

Nextflow is a bioinformatics workflow manager in which we can develop or reuse
bioinformatics pipeline analyses. It manages and supports many execution platforms
like local, HPC, cloud and so one. The aim is to develop a pipeline which can work
locally on your laptop and eventually in HPC environments or any other resource
that could scale with your data. This could be achieved by writing pipelines in
`Nextflow scripting <https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/script.html>`__ language
(or `DSL2 <https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/dsl2.html>`__) and managing your
software requirements with :doc:`conda <../terminal/conda>`,
:doc:`singularity <../terminal/singularity>` or :doc:`docker <../terminal/docker>`.

.. _learning-nextflow:

Learning Nextflow
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are online a serie of resorces and tutorial about nextflow. The first is
`this youtube playlist <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8_i8Tn335X0&list=PLPZ8WHdZGxmUv4W8ZRlmstkZwhb_fencI&ab_channel=Nextflow>`__
(here are `the tutorial notes <https://seqera.io/training/>`__ to code along and
a `git repository <https://github.com/bunop/nextflow-training>`__ adapted to work in a local environment).
Next there is the nextflow `reference documentation <https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/basic.html>`__,
which explains things in details. The community builded pipelines can be found
in the `pipeline section <https://nf-co.re/pipelines>`__ of `nf-core <https://nf-co.re/>`__
community site, while DSL2 pipeline modules can be found in `nf-core/modules <https://github.com/nf-core/modules>`__
github repository.

Installing Nextflow
-------------------

In order to install nextflow in your local environment ensure you have java installed::

  $ java -version

Next you could install nextflow in your local directory with::

  $ curl -s https://get.nextflow.io | bash

If you install nextflow in a directory inside your ``$PATH`` environment, you can
avoid to specify the relative or the full path when calling nextflow. Verify your
installation with::

  $ mkdir nf-hello
  $ cd nf-hello
  $ nextflow run hello

.. hint::

  Nextflow is already installed in our shared **core** environment, and can be called
  like a command since is available via ``$PATH`` environment variable

.. _install-nf-core:

Install nf-core/tools
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

`nf-core/tools <https://github.com/nf-core/tools>`__ is a python package which
integrates nextflow and is an helper tools for the nextflow community. Using
``nf-core`` software you could manage nextflow pipelines and modules. You can install
``nf-core`` in `many ways <https://github.com/nf-core/tools#installation>`__,
but the recommended way is using pip::

  $ pip install nf-core
  $ nf-core --help

.. note::

  You could install ``nf-core`` in a conda environment. Even if there's a ``nf-core``
  conda package, is better to install the **pypi** package version since it is the
  most update release and avoid some dependency issues with **bioconda**::

    $ conda create --name nf-core pip
    $ source activate nf-core
    $ pip install nf-core

.. hint::

  ``nf-core`` is already installed in a ``nf-core`` environment in our shared **core**
  *VM*::

    $ source activate nf-core
    $ nf-core --help

Configuring nextflow
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _set-singularity-cache:

Setting ``NXF_SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR``
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Using nextflow with singularity lets you to define a directory where remote Singularity
images are stored. This could speed up **a lot** pipelines execution times, since images
are downloaded once and then used when needed. You can define the location of such
directory by setting the ``NXF_SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR`` environment variable. Nextflow
will create such directory for you and will place every singularity downloaded image
inside this directory

.. hint::

  ``NXF_SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR`` is already defined for every user in our shared **core**
  infrastructure, and points by default at your ``${HOME}/nxf_singularity_cache/`` directory.
  If you want to change this value (for example, by setting a shared cache folder),
  you have to define such variable in your ``$HOME/.profile`` configuration file,
  for example::

    # override nextflow singularity cache dir
    export NXF_SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR=/home/core/nxf_singularity_cache/

.. warning::

  When using a computing cluster it must be a shared folder accessible from all computing nodes.

.. _nextflow-private-repo:

Access to private repositories
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

The file ``$HOME/.nextflow/scm`` can store the configuration required to access to
private repository in GitHub, for example::

  providers {
    github {
        user = '<your GitHub user>'
        password = '<your GitHub password>'
    }
  }

You could find more information in
`SCM configuration file <https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/sharing.html?highlight=credentials#scm-configuration-file>`__
section of nextflow documentation.

Commit message:

:memo: describe how to update a nextflow pipeline

docs/nextflow/getting-started.rst, after:


Getting started
===============

.. contents:: Table of Contents

Introduction
------------

Nextflow is a bioinformatics workflow manager in which we can develop or reuse
bioinformatics pipeline analyses. It manages and supports many execution platforms
like local, HPC, cloud and so one. The aim is to develop a pipeline which can work
locally on your laptop and eventually in HPC environments or any other resource
that could scale with your data. This could be achieved by writing pipelines in
`Nextflow scripting <https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/script.html>`__ language
(or `DSL2 <https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/dsl2.html>`__) and managing your
software requirements with :doc:`conda <../terminal/conda>`,
:doc:`singularity <../terminal/singularity>` or :doc:`docker <../terminal/docker>`.

.. _learning-nextflow:

Learning Nextflow
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are online a serie of resorces and tutorial about nextflow. The first is
`this youtube playlist <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8_i8Tn335X0&list=PLPZ8WHdZGxmUv4W8ZRlmstkZwhb_fencI&ab_channel=Nextflow>`__
(here are `the tutorial notes <https://seqera.io/training/>`__ to code along and
a `git repository <https://github.com/bunop/nextflow-training>`__ adapted to work in a local environment).
Next there is the nextflow `reference documentation <https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/basic.html>`__,
which explains things in details. The community builded pipelines can be found
in the `pipeline section <https://nf-co.re/pipelines>`__ of `nf-core <https://nf-co.re/>`__
community site, while DSL2 pipeline modules can be found in `nf-core/modules <https://github.com/nf-core/modules>`__
github repository.

Installing Nextflow
-------------------

In order to install nextflow in your local environment ensure you have java installed::

  $ java -version

Next you could install nextflow in your local directory with::

  $ curl -s https://get.nextflow.io | bash

If you install nextflow in a directory inside your ``$PATH`` environment, you can
avoid to specify the relative or the full path when calling nextflow. Verify your
installation with::

  $ mkdir nf-hello
  $ cd nf-hello
  $ nextflow run hello

.. hint::

  Nextflow is already installed in our shared **core** environment, and can be called
  like a command since is available via ``$PATH`` environment variable

.. _install-nf-core:

Install nf-core/tools
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

`nf-core/tools <https://github.com/nf-core/tools>`__ is a python package which
integrates nextflow and is an helper tools for the nextflow community. Using
``nf-core`` software you could manage nextflow pipelines and modules. You can install
``nf-core`` in `many ways <https://github.com/nf-core/tools#installation>`__,
but the recommended way is using pip::

  $ pip install nf-core
  $ nf-core --help

.. note::

  You could install ``nf-core`` in a conda environment. Even if there's a ``nf-core``
  conda package, is better to install the **pypi** package version since it is the
  most update release and avoid some dependency issues with **bioconda**::

    $ conda create --name nf-core pip
    $ source activate nf-core
    $ pip install nf-core

  An alternative way to install nf-core (v14) with conda is by installing package
  from both ``bioconda`` and ``conda-forge`` channels::

    $ conda create --channel bioconda --channel conda-forge --name nf-core nf-core=1.14

  However, it's better to do this in a fresh conda environment used only for nextflow.
  Please see our consideration :ref:`on channels <a-note-on-channels>`.

.. hint::

  ``nf-core`` is already installed in a ``nf-core`` environment in our shared **core**
  *VM*::

    $ source activate nf-core
    $ nf-core --help

Configuring nextflow
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _set-singularity-cache:

Setting ``NXF_SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR``
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Using nextflow with singularity lets you to define a directory where remote Singularity
images are stored. This could speed up **a lot** pipelines execution times, since images
are downloaded once and then used when needed. You can define the location of such
directory by setting the ``NXF_SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR`` environment variable. Nextflow
will create such directory for you and will place every singularity downloaded image
inside this directory

.. hint::

  ``NXF_SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR`` is already defined for every user in our shared **core**
  infrastructure, and points by default at your ``${HOME}/nxf_singularity_cache/`` directory.
  If you want to change this value (for example, by setting a shared cache folder),
  you have to define such variable in your ``$HOME/.profile`` configuration file,
  for example::

    # override nextflow singularity cache dir
    export NXF_SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR=/home/core/nxf_singularity_cache/

.. warning::

  When using a computing cluster it must be a shared folder accessible from all computing nodes.

.. _nextflow-private-repo:

Access to private repositories
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

The file ``$HOME/.nextflow/scm`` can store the configuration required to access to
private repository in GitHub, for example::

  providers {
    github {
        user = '<your GitHub user>'
        password = '<your GitHub password>'
    }
  }

You could find more information in
`SCM configuration file <https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/sharing.html?highlight=credentials#scm-configuration-file>`__
section of nextflow documentation.
